General Assembly
The 136th General Assembly officially began on Jan. 6, 2025. In regard to education-related bills, it is likely that property taxes will be an area of focus for both the Ohio House and Ohio Senate.

Background
The Ohio Fair School Funding (FSF) Plan is bipartisan legislation introduced in the Ohio House of Representatives as House Bill 1 (HB 1) by Republican Rep. Jamie Callender and Democratic Rep. Bride Rose Sweeney. The bill created a new school financing system for K-12 education in the State of Ohio, overhauling the state's school funding system that the Ohio Supreme Court found unconstitutional four times beginning with the original DeRolph decision in 1997. HB 1 was signed into law on July 1, 2021 as a part of the biennial state operating budget.

Legislative updates
Gov. Mike DeWine announced his last executive biennial budget on Feb. 3, 2025. The budget is for fiscal years 2026-27. While DeWine’s budget starts the process, the legislature largely crafts the finalized version. The budget proposal would continue the phase in of years five and six of the base cost component of the Fair School Funding (FSF) formula. One element of the formula that wasn’t included in DeWine’s budget was updating the base cost inputs. Without updating the inputs, the formula will become unbalanced and result in an overreliance on property taxes and a higher local share.

Budget highlights
DeWine’s budget proposal also includes these education-related items:
invests $50 million over the biennium to create a new vision services program, OhioSEE, which would ensure that K-three students who fail vision screenings receive comprehensive eye exams and glasses, if needed;
invests $30 million over the biennium to create a new school bus safety grant program based on the recommendations of the governor’s Ohio School Bus Safety Working Group, providing $4 million to increase the annual bus driver training requirement from four to six hours and widening access to advanced driver training;
earmarks $12 million in lottery funds for Science of Reading literacy coaches and requires that schools with low rates of proficient readers focus more funding on literacy supports;
dedicates $10 million over the biennium to the Ohio Principal Apprenticeship Program established in Senate Bill 168 of the 135th General Assembly;
invests $7 million each fiscal year in competitive grants to support career planning and workforce readiness initiatives for K-12 students;
creates the Driver Training in Schools Grant Program at the Ohio Department of Public Safety, funded by nonmedical marijuana sales tax revenue, for school districts to fund driver’s education at their high schools;
increases the Community School Facilities per pupil amount from $1,000 to $1,500;
continues the administration's work on school-based health, expanding the number of school-based health centers in high-need counties and providing resources and technical support to these health centers across the state.
continues state investments in school choice programs at levels similar to the current ones;

As of the end of January, 20 new bills have been introduced (14 Senate & 6 House).

Senate Bills
SB 3 – Sponsored by Sens. George Lang (R-West Chester) and Steve Huffman (R-Tipp City), this bill would phase down the state income tax to a flat rate of 2.75% over two years.
SB 7 – Sponsored by Sen. Johnson, this bill would require all types of school districts to provide annual instruction to students in grades K-12 on short-term or chronic substance use. ODEW and OMHAS would be required to compile a list of best practice curricula and materials, while local boards of education would determine how instruction is delivered and ensure that delivery is age-appropriate and within the ODEW and OMHAS best practice framework.
SB 12 – Sponsored by Sens. Steve Wilson (R-Maineville) and Jerry Cirino (R-Kirtland), this bill would permit a community foundation to be trustee of endowments and other charitable funds received by public schools, allow a public school to appoint a community foundation to invest money in the Education Foundation Fund created under continuing law and classify a fund held for an institution by a community foundation trustee as an “institutional fund.”
SB 13 – Sponsored by Sen. Michele Reynolds (R-Canal Winchester), this bill would establish the Foster-to-College Scholarship Program, require the Department of Education and Workforce to hire a full-time school foster care liaison, and make an appropriation for the program.
SB 19 – Sponsored by Sen. Brenner, this bill would require districts and schools to develop a mathematics improvement and monitoring plan for each student who qualifies for math intervention services beginning with the 2025-2026 school year. Each district or school with 51% or fewer students attaining at least a proficient score on the third-grade math achievement assessment would have to develop a mathematics achievement improvement plan. Additionally, the bill would require ODEW to randomly select 5% of districts and schools annually for a review of their academic intervention services.
SB 22 – Sponsored by Sens. Louis W. Blessing III (R-Colerain Township) and Hearcel F. Craig (D-Columbus), this bill would authorize a refundable income tax credit or rebate for homeowners and renters whose property taxes or a portion of their rent exceed 5% of their income.
SB 28 – Sponsored by Sens. Blessing and Nickie J. Antonio (D-Lakewood), this bill would levy a tax on certain high-volume landlords.
SB 29 – Sponsored by Sens. Blessing and Catherine D. Ingram (D-Cincinnati), this bill would allow two or more municipalities to create a joint economic development district without involving a township.
SB 34 – Sponsored by Sen. Johnson, this bill would require public school boards to select at least one of the bill's listed historical educational documents to display in every classroom in each school building the district operates by July 1, 2026. It would also permit the school board to accept donated funds and/or donated displays to meet the requirements of the bill.
SB 44 – Sponsored by Sen. O’Brien, this bill would allow students to concurrently receive an Educational Choice scholarship or Pilot Project scholarship and either an Autism or Jon Peterson Special Needs scholarship. It would also make a $42 million appropriation in FY26 and FY27 to offset costs.
SB 47 – Sponsored by Sen. Ingram, this bill would require disclosure of the for-profit status of community school operators and post-secondary educational institutions on various promotional materials and contracts for employment.
SB 48 – Sponsored by Sen. Ingram, this bill would require the Auditor of State to annually audit each chartered nonpublic school that receives public money.
SB 49 – Sponsored by Sen. Ingram, this bill would eliminate the right of first refusal for certain schools in the acquisition of school district real property.
SB 62 - Sponsored by Sen. Theresa Gavarone (R-Bowling Green), the Senate’s version of the “School Bus Safety Act” would authorize a civil penalty system related to drivers who illegally pass a school bus but cannot be identified, direct fees and fines related to illegally passing a school bus to a bus safety grant fund at ODEW, and designate the month of August as "School Bus Safety Awareness Month".

House Bills
HB 3 –  Sponsored by Reps. Bernard Willis (R-Springfield) and Cecil Thomas (D-Cincinnati), the “School Bus Safety Act” would appropriate $25 million to create a School Bus Safety Grant Fund at ODEW to assist districts with the cost of installing safety features on new and existing school buses. The bill would also increase the penalties for illegally passing a stopped school bus and designate August as “School Bus Safety Month”.
HB 7 – Sponsored by Andrea White (R-Kettering) and Sharon A. Ray (R-Wadsworth), this bill would make foster caregivers and kinship caregivers eligible for publicly funded child care.
HB 10 – Sponsored by  Reps. Roy Klopfenstein (R-Haviland) and Jack Daniels (R-Akron), this bill would require public school boards of education and ODEW to adopt policies prohibiting the purchase of “cultivated-protein food” products or food “misbranded as a meat or egg product”.
HB 22 – Sponsored by Reps. Brian Lorenz (R-Powell) and Cecil Thomas (D-Cincinnati), this bill would authorize a full homestead exemption for surviving spouses of members of the uniformed services killed in the line of duty.
HB 25 – Sponsored by Reps. Dontavius Jarrells (D-Columbus) and Ray, this bill is the House companion bill to SB 13, establishing the Foster-to-College Scholarship Program.
HB 28 – Sponsored by Reps. Adam Matthews (R-Lebanon) and Thomas Hall (R-Madison Twp.), this bill would eliminate the authority to levy replacement property tax levies.

