Senate Education Committee bills to watch
The biennial budget bill, House Bill (HB) 96, is moving quickly. The Ohio House is expected to finish up its version of HB 96 on April 9. The legislature will then take a two-week break and return to the Statehouse the week of April 28. This budget has been moving faster than normal, and the Senate has already indicated that it plans to finalize its work by the end of May. Many of the Senate education bills are expected to be amended into the Senate version of HB 96. The following are the education bills to watch.
SB 7 - substance abuse instruction
Sponsored by Sen. Terry Johnson (R- McDermott), this bill would require that all types of school districts provide annual instruction to K-12 students on the effects of short-term and chronic substance use in a manner determined by the local school board. Additionally, the bill would require instruction in the harmful effects of and legal restrictions against using drugs of abuse, specifically marijuana, opioids and opiates. The bill would also require that the instruction include bullying and hazing curriculum. Finally, the Ohio Department of Education and Workforce (ODEW) would be required to collaborate with the Ohio Department of Mental Health and Addiction Services on a list of evidence-based curricula, materials, programs and instructional strategies that schools can use for instruction. ODEW would also be required to survey public school compliance on this instruction.
SB 19 - math improvement plans
The bill is sponsored by Sen. Andrew O. Brenner (R-Delaware) and would require that districts and schools develop a mathematics improvement and monitoring plan for each student who qualifies for math intervention services, beginning with the 2025-26 school year. A student would qualify if they received a limited level score on the math Ohio State Test. Additionally, beginning with the 2025-26 school year, the bill would require that each district or school develop a mathematics achievement improvement plan if 51% or less of the district or school’s students who took the third-grade math achievement assessment attained at least a proficient score on the assessment.
The bill also requires that ODEW randomly select 5% of districts and schools and review their academic intervention services. ODEW would be required to create a universal K-three diagnostic assessment for math and reading and create a list of high-quality materials.
The State Board of Education (SBOE) would be required to assess the math proficiency of new applicants for education licenses. If an applicant does not demonstrate proficiency, they could be issued a license but would be barred from providing math instruction until they demonstrate proficiency.
Finally, seventh graders who score “accomplished” or “advanced” in math achievement are required to be enrolled in eighth-grade algebra I, starting with the 2026-27 school year. A parent could opt the child out of the requirement.
SB 34 - required posting of historical documents 
Sponsored by Johnson, this bill would require that public school boards select, by July 1, 2026, at least four of the bill's listed historical educational documents to display in each social studies or history classroom in which students in grades four-12. The list of historical educational documents includes:
the Mayflower Compact;
the Declaration of Independence;
the mottoes of the United States and Ohio;
the Ten Commandments;
the Magna Carta;
the Bill of Rights;
the U.S. Constitution;
the Articles of Confederation.
SB 127 - closure of poor performing schools
Sponsored by Brenner, this bill would alter the closure requirements for poor-performing public schools. A public school building would be subject to closure if it meets all three criteria for the three most recent school years. The criteria are:
The school offers a grade level higher than three;
In its performance index score, the school has been ranked in the bottom 5% of all rated school buildings in the state;
The school has been ranked by the effect size under the value-added progress dimension in the bottom 10% of all ranked school buildings in the state.
The bill indicates that data will not be used from the 2024-25 school year report card or any report card prior to 2024-25.
If a school building meets the above criteria for three consecutive years, the bill requires the administration of the school to do one of the following:
Close the school.
Contract with one of the following to operate the school:
An education or charter management organization that is approved by ODEW and either:
has experience in school improvement;
manages schools that received an average of at least three stars in the achievement and progress components ratings on the most recent state report card.
A school district that has received an overall rating of at least four stars on the most recent state report card, has experience in school improvement and does not operate any school subject to the public school closure law;
Any of the following entities that has experience in school improvement and meet criteria established by ODEW:
an ESC;
a private college;
a state institution of higher education.
Replace the principal and at least a majority of licensed school staff, though this option only prevails over conflicting collective bargaining agreements or employment contracts entered into after the bill’s effective date.
Work with an ODEW-approved external service provider with expertise in school improvement.
In the case of a school building operated by a school district, consolidate the school district in control of the school building into another school district. If a district does so, SBOE must approve any resulting territory transfer.
If the school building implements one of the above alternative measures and continues to meet the poor performance criteria for the next three consecutive years, the building would be required to close.
Next steps
The House is finalizing its work on HB 96. The Senate will begin work the week of April 28, with the Senate Education Committee deliberating the education-related items in the budget.
House Education Committee bills to watch
The Ohio General Assembly is working on the FY2026-27 biennial budget, and while the bill will appropriate state funds during the next two years, it will also contain many policy changes. Those policy changes are often House and Senate bills that have already been introduced. While the number of committee hearings a bill has received could indicate the likeliness of it working its way into the budget, some bills may be amended without any hearings.
The Ohio House is in the process of drafting its version of the budget. As that work takes place, the House Education Committee is also reviewing education-related bills. A few bills to watch over the next few weeks are detailed below.
HB 62 - College Credit Plus (CCP) Program changes
The bill is sponsored by Reps. Justin Pizzulli (R-Scioto County) and Adam C. Bird (R-New Richmond) and would make changes to the College Credit Plus (CCP) Program. Changes were made to the CCP Program during the last General Assembly, and this bill continues the discussion on many policy items that didn’t make it into the final version. HB 62 includes the following changes:
Requires that each public and participating private college endeavor to use open-source materials, instead of purchase-only textbooks, for CCP courses in which students are enrolled.
Requires that a college pay the textbook costs for CCP students if it uses purchase-only textbooks in a course for which open-source materials are available.
Requires that the college and the CCP student’s secondary school each pay 50% of textbook costs if the institution uses purchase-only textbooks in a course for which no open-source materials are available.
Modifies the default state payment structure for a public or nonpublic school student taking a CCP course through a public or private college. If a student is taking a course on the college’s campus and the student’s school offers the same course taught by a high school teacher who has earned the required credential to teach the course, the state must instead pay the default floor amount to the college at which the student is taking the course. For a student enrolled in a CCP course delivered online by a public or private college, the bill requires that the state instead pay the college the lesser of 50% of the default ceiling amount or the college’s standard rate.
Reduces the permitted maximum sum of (1) the state payment for and (2) the amount charged to a public school student taking an online course through a private college with which the student’s school has entered an alternative payment agreement.
Requires that each public and private college participating in CCP provide notice to a student’s school if the student withdrawals from a CCP course offered by the college.
HB 114 - modified age requirements for kindergarten admission
The bill, sponsored by Reps. Bird and Kevin Ritter (R-Marietta), would alter age requirements for kindergarten admission, expanding them to include 6-year-olds who have not completed first grade. The bill would make the following changes:
Requires that public schools admit to kindergarten any child who will be 5 years old or, if the child has not completed first grade, 6 years old, by the first day of instruction of the school year of admittance.
Eliminates the referral and evaluation process by a which a public school may admit to kindergarten a 4-year-old who will turn 5 by Jan. 1 of the requested school year of admittance.
Eliminates the law that permits a child who will not be 5 by Jan. 1 of the requested school year of admittance to be admitted to kindergarten early under a school district’s student acceleration policy.
HB 117 - Pledge of Allegiance recitation requirements
The bill, sponsored by Reps. Tracy M. Richardson (R-Marysville) and Sean P. Brennan (D-Parma), would require that the Pledge of Allegiance be recited in schools daily. Current law requires a school district to have a policy that is publicly accessible, but this bill would require that the policy include daily recitation. The bill also would encourage schools and teachers to develop and implement lessons related to the American flag and Pledge of Allegiance.
HB 119 - Graduation Readiness and Development (GRAD)
This bill is sponsored by Reps. Josh Williams (R- Sylvania Twp.) and Nick Santucci (R-Niles). It would enact the Graduation Readiness and Development (GRAD) Act, regarding exit orientation programs at public high schools. The bill outlines the information required to be included in the programs, such as financial resources, military enlistment, workforce-related information and voter registration. The bill also directs public schools on the timing of when the orientation programs need to be held.
HB 145 - increase minimum number of school hours
The bill, sponsored by Bird, would increase the minimum number of school hours by 27 hours for part-time kindergarten and 53 hours for all-day kindergarten through 12th grade.
Next steps
Currently, House leadership and the House Finance Committee chair are reviewing approximately 3,000 amendments, each of which was sponsored by one of the 99 state representatives. A substitute bill is expected to be introduced April 1. The House Finance Committee will then accept additional amendments in the form of an omnibus amendment that will likely be introduced in committee on April 8. HB 96, the budget bill, will likely pass out of committee on April 8 with a floor vote scheduled to occur on April 9.
