OSBA legislative report
To take effect on February 25, 2025:
Senate Bill 104 - takes effect on February 25, 2025
HB 183 was added as an amendment to SB 104 and passed by the House on July 26, 2024. SB 104 (inclusive of HB 183) was passed out of the legislature on November 13, 2024. Governor DeWine signed SB 104 on November 27, 2024. This bill addresses the College Credit Plus Program and the Protect All Students Act regarding single-sex bathroom access in primary and secondary schools and institutions of higher education. Sections 3314.03, 3319.90, 3326.11, and 3345.90 of the Revised Code are amended or enacted.

On January 2, Governor DeWine signed into law SB54 and HB315. On January 8, he signed SB208, SB234, HB8 and HB 206. These laws will take effect 90 days after he signed them (i.e. April 2 & 8).

Two of these addressed suicide prevention. This is sadly too late for the tragedy that affected the family of Blake Sumego on September 27, 2024. Hopefully we can take positive action to prevent future occurrences.
Senate Bill (SB) 54 - Sponsored by Sen. Michelle Reynolds (R-Canal Winchester) and Vernon Sykes (D-Akron). An education-related appropriation of $250,000 was made in the bill for the 1in5 Foundation (located in Cincinnati) to promote suicide prevention in schools. The law will take effect on April 2, 2025.
House Bill (HB) 315 - Sponsored by Reps. Thomas Hall (R-Madison Township) and Bill Seitz (R-Cincinnati), this omnibus bill made a plethora of changes to township and other local and state government law. Of interest to school districts, the bill included the ability for townships to extend a tax increment financing districts for 15 additional years, made changes to current agricultural use value (CAUV) property taxes for land in connection with the H2Ohio program, and added new requirements of the Department of Education and Workforce (DEW) to provide all school districts with best practices to help ensure the educational stability of students who are in the foster care system. Governor DeWine vetoed specific sections of the bill dealing with exemptions to ethics laws, clerk of court governance and “medical free speech”. The law will take effect on April 2, 2025.
SB 208 - Sponsored by Sen. Kristina Roegner (R-Hudson), this bill originally created open enrollment policy exceptions for military children, but was amended by the House to include changes to school district and educational service center purchases of technological equipment, virtual services provided under special needs scholarship programs, public school employee in-service training in child sexual abuse prevention, pre-service teacher permits and student and driver training instruction in peace officer interactions. The bill also establishes early childhood education Regional Partnerships Programs and exempts home education groups from child care regulations and county and township zoning regulations. The law will take effect on April 8, 2025.
SB 234 - Sponsored by Sen. Theresa Gavarone (R-Bowling Green), this bill will  designate May as “Food Allergy Awareness Month” and “Lupus Awareness Month”, and require schools and higher education institutions to include the national suicide and crisis lifeline telephone number on student identification cards, student planners and electronic portals (language formally a part of HB 571). The law will take effect on April 8, 2025.
HB 8 - Sponsored by Reps. D.J. Swearingen (R-Huron) and Sara P. Carruthers (R-Hamilton), this bill enacts the "Parents' Bill of Rights" to require public schools to adopt a policy on parental notification on student health and well-being and instructional materials with sexually explicit content as well as a policy on release time for religious instruction (RTRI). Formerly language from HB 445 and SB 293, the Senate added the RTRI amendment to HB 8 and clarified that boards of education may include in their policy a requirement for background checks of employees and volunteers of RTRI sponsors as well as their own definition of core curriculum. Boards of education and the sponsoring RTRI entity are required to collaborate on when programming is offered during the school day. The law will take effect on April 8, 2025.
HB 206 - Sponsored by Reps. Gary Click (R-Vickery) and Monica Robb Blasdel (R-Columbiana), this bill will make changes regarding the expulsion of a student from a public school for actions that endanger the health and safety of other students or school employees. In addition to the changes to expulsion procedures, the Senate amended the bill to include 2024-2025 school year exemptions for community school closures, new protocols for schools’ storage of seizure medications, and an increase in funding for school choice program administration by $4,140,000 in FY 2025. The law will take effect on April 8, 2025.

House Bill (HB) 8
Sponsored by Reps. D.J. Swearingen (R-Huron) and Sara P. Carruthers (R-Hamilton), HB 8 was sent to Governor DeWine on December 30, 2024. The law will take effect on April 8, 2025. 
The bill would enact the "Parents' Bill of Rights,” requiring public schools to adopt a policy on parental notification on student health and well-being and instructional materials with sexually explicit content. The bill was amended to require districts to adopt a policy allowing for release time religious instruction (RTRI) and defines core curriculum as “reading and English language arts, mathematics, science, social studies and health education.”

Edited version: “A school district board of education may shall adopt a policy that authorizes a student to be excused from school to attend a released time course in religious instruction, provided that each of the following applies:


House Speaker Jason Stephens (R-Kitts Hill) has repeatedly stated that he wants a “clean” bill, meaning that he doesn’t want the bill to pick up amendments that do not pertain to the title. The Senate Education Committee could amend the bill on Dec. 17 to remove RTRI language, or the chair, Sen. Andrew O. Brenner (R-Delaware), could move the bill out of committee with the RTRI language to see what Stephens does on the House floor. 

Even if HB 8 doesn’t move during this General Assembly, the bill will likely be reintroduced in the next General Assembly. 

Senate Bill (SB) 295 
SB 295, sponsored by Brenner, would require schools in the bottom 5% of the performance index and bottom 10% of the progress measure for three consecutive years to choose to either close or implement an alternative to closure. SB 295 is scheduled for a hearing in Senate Education but not for a vote as of writing this article. The bill could be amended in HB 206. Like other education-related bills, if it fails to be enacted during this General Assembly, it will likely be introduced in the next. 

HB 206 
Sponsored by Reps. Gary Click (R-Vickery) and Monica Robb Blasdel (R-Columbiana), HB 206 would make changes regarding the expulsion of a student from a public school for actions that endanger other students' or school employees' health and safety. HB 206 could pick up Senate amendments as they look for an education-related vehicle to address any items the Senate wants to take legislative action on during this General Assembly. However, the House will need to concur with any Senate changes. 

SB 208 
The bill is sponsored by Sen. Kristina Roegner (R-Hudson). It would require school districts to include an exception for children of active-duty military personnel in their open enrollment policies and permit a student enrolled under a district's open enrollment policy exception for children of military personnel to continue to attend that district and receive transportation services for the remainder of the school year if the student's parent is no longer on active duty. SB 208 does address a few additional education-related issues: 

requires the board of education of a school district and the governing board of an educational service center to seek to meet the "varying and unique needs of students and teachers" when purchasing technological office equipment and computer hardware and software and requires the board to consider the long-term cost of ownership, flexibility for innovation and any anticipated residual or salvage value at the end of the target life cycle;  
permits educational aides or assistants and instructional assistants to provide services under the Autism and Jon Peterson Special Needs scholarships virtually;  
permits, rather than requires, public schools to have law enforcement officers or prosecutors with relevant experience provide employee in-service training on child sexual abuse and specifies that those officers and prosecutors may provide the training at their discretion so long as they have relevant experience;  
eliminates provisions of law that required the following: the Department of Education and Workforce to adopt a model curriculum for high school students on proper interactions with peace officers during traffic stops and other encounters;  school districts and other public schools to use the department's model curriculum in at least one course required for high school graduation; and the director of Public Safety to adapt the department's model curriculum for use in driver training programs and new driver instructional materials;  
establishes the Prenatal-to-Five Early Childhood to Post-Secondary Regional Partnerships Program to support early childhood to post-secondary regional partnerships throughout Ohio;  
permits a preservice teacher permit to be one year in duration, in addition to three years as under continuing law. 

This bill is awaiting a concurrence vote in the Senate, which will likely agree to the changes in the bill. 

SB 104
HB 183 was added as an amendment to SB 104 and passed by the House on July 26, 2024. SB 104 (inclusive of HB 183) was passed out of the legislature on November 13, 2024. Governor DeWine signed SB 104 on November 27, 2024. The law will take effect on February 25, 2025. This bill included the Protect All Students Act regarding single-sex bathroom access in primary and secondary schools and institutions of higher education. Sections 3314.03, 3319.90, 3326.11, and 3345.90 of the Revised Code are amended or enacted.
